
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# EVEP

A Package to Evaluate Variant Effect Prediction.

## Description

The objective of `EVEP` is to evaluate the effectiveness of training
data size or data augmentation for machine learning variant effect
prediction. Variant effect prediction (VEP) is to predict the functional
change corresponding to an amino acid sequence and potential mutation
for a given protein. VEP often adopts machine learning (ML) models
trained by actual experimental data measuring quantitative effect of
mutations1. However, there is a paradox for the training data size.
Generally, the more training data is prepared, the more accurate
predictions are made, while the more time, money and labour are required
at the same time. Therefore, it is important to estimate the size of
experimentally obtained training data from which ML VEP’s prediction is
sufficiently accurate. It also helps that a machine learning model which
is able to estimate the variant effect from small size of training data
can make VEP more efficient in terms of training data preparation. For
the latter purpose, data augmentation is sometimes used for ML models
for VEP. Data augmentation is a technique to increase the data size by
making a small change in the original data. There are many possible data
augmentation methods as data augmentation is frequently used in other
fields such as image recognition and natural language processing.
However, as data augmentation has been rarely done in protein
engineering, there is no consensus about effectiveness of various
methods for data augmentation in VEP. `EVEP` analyzes and visualizes the
relationship between training data size and prediction accuracy. It also
can be used to evaluate the contribution of data augmentation. Users can
make a use of this tool to estimate a required size of training data for
a given accuracy or cost performance. Users should have their own
dataset and use this tool to analyse, but sample dataset is given in
`data/sample_random_data.csv`. This dataset is generated by
`randomData.R` `EVEP` is developed using R version 4.2.1 and Mac. Note
that there is no shiny implementation yet.

## Installation

To install the latest version of the package:

``` r
require("devtools")
devtools::install_github("SZFukunaga/EVEP", build_vignettes = TRUE)
library("EVEP")
```

## Overview

``` r
ls("package:EVEP")
data(package = "EVEP") 
browseVignettes("EVEP")
```

`EVEP` contains 2 functions to evaluate and visualize the effect of
variant effect prediction. The *evaluateVEP* function calculates
statistical measures such as pearson correlation, kendall correlation or
mean squared error. User-defined statistical measures can be added. The
*visualizeEvaluation* generates a plot which represents the statistical
measure from *evaluateVEP*. This function helps users to understand how
training data size and data augmentation affects the accuracy of VEP
along the statistical measure of choice.

## Contributions

The author of the package is Shuzo Fukunaga. The *evaluateVEP* and
*visualizeEvaluation* make use of onlu build-in R functions.

## References

Horne, J., Shukla, D. (2022) Recent Advances in Machine Learning Variant
Effect Prediction Tools for Protein Engineering. *Indivisual &
Engineering Chemistry Research* 61, 6235-6245.
<https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.iecr.1c04943>

R Core Team (2021). R: A language and environment for statistical
computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.
<https://www.R-project.org/>

Bonnet, D.G., Wright, T.A., (2000) Sample size requirements for estimating pearson, kendall and spearman correlations. *Psychometrika* 65, 23–28.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02294183>


## Acknowledgements

This package was developed for 2022 BCB410H Assignment: Applied
Bioinformatics course at the University of Toronto, Toronto, CANADA.
